---
layout: post
title: "Monitoring your services with SO-Aware"
date: 2010-12-02
comments: true
categories: .NET
---

One of the features that you get out of the box with SO-Aware is the
ability of monitoring your services. You can either monitoring the
traffic for your REST or SOAP services, and see the details of all the
incoming or outgoing messages, or any fault that got generated during
the execution. In addition, that data is used to compute some metrics
and provide several reports about the service usage.

The following images illustrates some of the reports provided by
SO-Aware.

[![110210\_1941\_monitoringa1](http://weblogs.asp.net/blogs/cibrax/110210_1941_monitoringa1_thumb_7D60E569.png "110210_1941_monitoringa1")](http://weblogs.asp.net/blogs/cibrax/110210_1941_monitoringa1_676A9FA4.png)Â 

[![110210\_1941\_monitoringa2](http://weblogs.asp.net/blogs/cibrax/110210_1941_monitoringa2_thumb_1E340C77.png "110210_1941_monitoringa2")](http://weblogs.asp.net/blogs/cibrax/110210_1941_monitoringa2_157429F8.png)

[![110210\_1941\_monitoringa4](http://weblogs.asp.net/blogs/cibrax/110210_1941_monitoringa4_thumb_0C17A31D.png "110210_1941_monitoringa4")](http://weblogs.asp.net/blogs/cibrax/110210_1941_monitoringa4_0594495A.png)

All the monitoring in SO-Aware is performed by a custom WCF service
behavior that needs to be configured in any existing service. If you are
using the service host provided by SO-Aware to automatically configure
the service from the configuration in the repository, you also get
monitoring for free, as that service host automatically injects the
service behavior for monitoring according to the tracking profile
selected for the service in the configuration page.

[![tracking](http://weblogs.asp.net/blogs/cibrax/tracking_thumb_7A86F6AA.png "tracking")](http://weblogs.asp.net/blogs/cibrax/tracking_38B03729.png)

SO-Aware supports four different tracking profiles, InformationSoap,
InformationRest, VerboseSoap and VerboseRest. Information or Verbose
specifies the level of detail that you want to track for the service,
and this should be chosen carefully to avoid affecting the service
performance in general. Soap or Rest specifies the tracking service that
you want to use. SO-Aware provides two tracking service versions by
default, one SOAP implementation that uses binary encoding with tcp for
better performance, and a http implementation that provides better
interoperability.

An important thing to consider is that SO-Aware does not compete with
Windows AppFabric in the monitoring aspect by any means, but it can be
used as a good complement. The monitoring behavior in SO-Aware can be
configured as an additional tracking participant in AppFabric to send
more information and details about the messages to the AppFabric
tracking database.

