---
layout: post
title: "The “Liike” project. Mobile Web guidance from Microsoft P&amp;P"
date: 2012-01-02
comments: true
categories: .NET
---

Microsoft Patterns & Practices has recently started a new project whose
codename is “Liike” (pronounced as LEEE-keh) for delivering guidance and
a reference application in the mobile web space. As many of the recent
initiatives started by different teams in Microsoft, this project will
also be hosted in GitHub under
[http://liike.github.com/](http://liike.github.com/). All the artifacts,
patterns and code generated during the project will be shared as part of
that project.

Html5 and the rise of mobile devices have contributed to make Web Mobile
one of the hot topics nowadays. Embarking in a new project for
implementing a web mobile application can be a bit cumbersome without
proper documentation or knowledge of proven practices. This project will
try to address many of the concerns you might have by showing different
patterns or solutions that can be applied in the context of web mobile,
and how those solutions get reflected in real code with the Microsoft
stack. The idea is not produce reusable code, but a reference
application that people can explore.

As any of projects in MS Patterns & Practices, Microsoft does not have
the final word on any of the discussed topics and a lot of feedback is
received. They also have a team of external advisors with a bunch of
talented people that have an extensive background working in this space.

Your help is always very valuable, so you can also contribute to the
project by joining to the [advisory
team](http://liike.github.com/advisors/) or giving feedback through user
voice
[here](http://liike.uservoice.com/forums/136038-mobile-web-dev-guidance).  

