---
layout: post
title: "AgileSight, my new venture"
date: 2012-02-06
comments: true
categories: .NET
---

Another important milestone in my career started three years ago when I
joined [Tellago](http://www.tellago.com). I convinced my friend
[Jesus](http://weblogs.asp.net/gsusx) to hire me, and I would eventually
move to the United States with my family to work in the company.  That
never occurred for some personal things, but I fortunately had a chance
to create an excellent team of very talented people in Argentina. I
started myself working remotely from Argentina, and the things went so
well for the company that we end up hiring more than 15 great architects
down here in Argentina.  Creating this team was a very interesting and
completely new challenge in my career.

I also got involved in a lot of interesting projects, and what is more
important, I had a chance to work and met great people, which is what it
really worth it.

However, a month ago, I decided it was about time to start a personal
project with a [good friend of
mine](http://www.linkedin.com/pub/pablo-galiano/3/592/aba), and that’s
how [AgileSight](http://agilesight.com) was born. Although the initial
conception of the company was to create software products, we will also
offering software consulting and development services. I am definitely
very excited to be part of this new venture and face all new kind of
challenges ahead.

My first assignment in AgileSight couldn’t be better as I will be
working in the next Web Mobile Guidance project ([Liike
project](http://liike.github.com/team/)) with the Microsoft Patterns &
Practices team.

